Rene Descartes’ assertion that ideas may be held true with certainty if they are “clear and distinct” provides the
context for Peirce’s title, “How to Make Our Ideas Clear.” Peirce argued that an idea may seem clear if it is familiar.
Distinctness depends on having good definitions, and while definitions are desirable they do not yield any new
knowledge or certainty of the truth of empirical propositions. Peirce argues that thought needs more than a sense of
clarity; it also needs a method for making ideas clear. Once we have made an idea clear, then we can begin the task of
determining its truth. The method that Peirce offers came to be known as the pragmatic method and the epistemology
on which it depends is pragmatism. Peirce rejected Descartes’ method of doubt. We cannot doubt something, for the
sake of method, that we do not doubt in fact. In a later essay, he would state as his rule “Dismiss make-believes.” This
refers to Descartes’ method of doubting things, in the safety of his study, such things as the existence of the material
world, which he did not doubt when he went out on the street. Peirce proposed that a philosophical investigation can
begin from only one state of mind, namely, the state of mind in which we find ourselves when we begin. If any of us
examines our state of mind, we find two kinds of thoughts: beliefs and doubts. Peirce had presented the interaction of
doubt and belief in an earlier essay “The Fixation of Belief”.
Beliefs and doubts are distinct. Beliefs consist of states of mind in which we would make a statement; doubts are states
in which we would ask a question. We experience a doubt as a sense of uneasiness and hesitation. Doubt serves as an
irritant that causes us to appease it by answering a question and thereby fixing a belief and putting the mind to rest on
that issue. A common example of a doubt would be arriving in an unfamiliar city and not being sure of the location of
our destination address in relation to our present location. We overcome this doubt and fix a belief by getting the
directions. Once we achieve a belief, we can take the necessary action to reach our destination. Peirce defines a belief
subjectively as something of which we are aware and which appeases the doubt. Objectively, a belief is a rule of action.
The whole purpose of thought consists in overcoming a doubt and attaining a belief. Peirce acknowledges that some
people like to think about things or argue about them without caring to find a true belief, but he asserts that such
dilettantism does not constitute thought. The beliefs that we hold determine how we will act. If we believe, rightly or
wrongly, that the building that we are trying to reach sits one block to our north, we will walk in that direction. We have
beliefs about matters of fact, near and far. For example, we believe in the real objects in front of us and we believe
generally accepted historical statements. We also believe in relations of ideas such as that seven and five equal twelve.
In addition to these we have many beliefs about science, politics, economics, religion and so on. Some of our beliefs
may be false since we are capable of error. To believe something means to think that it is true.